
## What is Gistorio?

[![Join the chat at https://gitter.im/gistorio/Lobby](https://badges.gitter.im/gistorio/Lobby.svg)](https://gitter.im/gistorio/Lobby?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge&utm_content=badge)

History, or at least our 'collective' history, has a major flaw. History _is_
written and may be subjectively altered based on needs and requirements of
existing population or figures in power. While it is harder to hide certain
facts that have solid documentary proof, it is easy to skew, or sometimes
completely turn around, subjective interpretation of a fact. For a radical
example, lets take the holocaust. We all know for a fact, that holocaust
happened, we have proof for that in documents (texts, pictures, witness
reports, etc). Now what we do not know for a fact if that historical event was
good or bad. We have subjective interpretations of it, and given enough
initiative _some_ facts can be skewed to become good or bad. I sincerely hope
that holocaust will never become a victim of skewed historical interpretation,
yet there are many more less known incidents that are used to manipulate people
into thinking one way or another.

And some are really close to home.

I live in a post soviet country. Grandfathers of my generation have fought in
partisan wars to restore the independence of our country. During the times of
upheaval many events, that can be vaguely interpreted had happened. Recently
people who had fought in the actual war (and are still alive) had started to
notice that opinion about particular events is changing over the course of
time. I imagine that if there were enough information accessible about any of
those events, the opinion would be _more_ stable. And hopefully closer to
actual truth.

So idea behind Gistorio is to serve as a link between historical events,
objective sources behind that event and various interpretations of those
sources. There is only one requirement: Gistorio must be trustworthy.

## How to ensure trustworthiness?

Steal ideas from Wikipedia, crypto currencies
and git.

1. Any edit to the Gistory must happen on top of last edit, with an unbreakable
   linking to ancestor.
2. There can't be a single source of truth. Majority holds the truth.
3. Keep human feedback as valid as any other source of interpretation, track
   historical changes to interpretations.
4. Because it is impossible to gather all historical documents in one location,
   Gistory should resort to 'protected links', which would simply check if the
   document changed or not from the moment it was linked. Think sha sums.

Alone these ideas will not make Gistory anything better than Wikipedia. And
actually Wikipedia has the second and third points almost covered, with several
exceptions. Namely -- I can, given enough time and lack of interest/protection
on a particular topic, skew the topic to whatever side I see useful, just by
editing the wiki page.

Second point should help to diminish the possibility of history altering
events. As funny and paranoid that sounds, but nobody could stop a determined
individual from altering internal Wikipedia database to suggest that holocaust
was a genetic cleansing and brought only greater good. That is a ridiculous and
obviously false suggestion, but how many people, without seeing actual
documents, would come to accept that given idea, just because they don't have
enough information to rule that fallacy themselves? And, hey, things in
Wikipedia have always been true. Why someone would lie on the internet?

While the argument seems ridiculous applied to historical events that have
_physical_ proof, like paper documents, stone slabs or photographs, it is way
more important to events that are happening right now, where a tweet is source
document, a meme is an interpretation and a blog post is an analytical
overview.

## What now?

At this point -- this is just an idea. And this place is used to gather
information and (perhaps) support for it. Go on in [GitHub issues](https://github.com/xytis/gistorio/issues) and report
whatever you seem worth noticing.
